(happy bells)
(logo whoosh)
(typing)
(mouse clicking)
Alright so let's start implementing
a simple binary search tree now.
For our implementation we're just gonna store
integer values in the nodes
but you can store any type of data in a binary search tree.
We'll keep things simple for our implementation
so we can focus on the code and
the concepts that are related to trees
and we'll just store integers.
So the first thing I'm gonna do is
create a class for a node,
and I'm gonna call it TreeNode.
And we're gonna have three fields.
We're gonna have a field for the data
so that it'll be an integer
and then we need fields for
the left child and the right child
because each node could potentially
have a left child and a right child.
So we'll say private TreeNode leftChild
and private TreeNode rightChild.
So I'm gonna have the IDE generate
sets and gets for these guys so I'll right click,
say generate, I want getters and setters,
and I'll select everything and click okay.
So now we have our gets and sets
and I'm gonna add a constructor
public TreeNode and it'll accept
the value we wanna store in this node
and it'll just do the usual this dot data equals data.
When we construct the node it'll be a LeafNode at first
and so we don't have anything
to assign to the left and right childs.
Alright so now we need a class for the tree itself
so I'll create a new java class,
call it tree
and we only need one field in the tree
and that's the root node
because if we have the root we
can get to everything else.
It's similar to the link list.
All we needed was the head of the list
and if we have that we can get to
everything else through the next fields.
Well if we have the root node we
can get to everything else by
traversing it's left child and it's right child.
So we'll say private TreeNode root
and that's it.
That's all we need for our tree.
We need a class for the tree and
a class for the nodes that will go into the tree.
Alright so to build a binary tree we're
going to need to insert nodes and
the way we're gonna do it,
and we went through this on the slides is,
if we come to insert a node,
if the tree is empty then the node
becomes the root and we're done.
If the tree isn't empty we're gonna
compare the value we're inserting against the root node.
If it's less than the root node we're
going to go to the left and if it's greater
than the root node we're going to go to the right
and then we're gonna rinse and repeat.
So we'd look at the left child
in the case of going to the left
and if the value is less than the left child
we're gonna go to the left.
If the value is greater we're gonna go to the right.
At each step we're gonna compare
to the current node that we're looking at
and we're gonna move to the left or right subtree
and we're gonna keep doing that until we hit an empty spot,
and then we'll insert the node.
Now in this implementation we're
not going to worry about duplicate values.
In fact we're not going to allow them
so if we try to insert a node and we find a duplicate value,
so eventually we come across a node
and when we compare the value equal to node
then we'll just kick out.
We won't insert the node.
So you might think that we have an
insert method in the tree and we will
but we'll also have an insert method in our TreeNode class.
And so that's where we're gonna start.
Actually ill put it above all the sets and gets.
So we're gonna say public void insert
and we need the value
we wanna insert into the tree
and we're gonna start out by checking
whether the value equals the data in this node.
So when this insert method gets called
we're gonna compare the value we wanna insert
against the value of the node
that we're calling the insert method with.
And so the first thing we're gonna do
is say is the value equal to the value for this node
because if it is it's a duplicate value
and we don't wanna do anything.
So we'll say if value
equals
data
we're just gonna return
because our tree doesn't support duplicate values.
Now we could return something to the caller
and everything else but we'll just
ignore that and say hey if you
have a duplicate value it's a no-op.
Okay so if we don't return then
the value in the node we're checking
is either less than or greater than
the value we wanna insert so we're
gonna say if
the value we wanna insert
is less than the data in this node
what do we wanna do?
Well we wanna go to the left.
And so we'll check to see if there is a left child.
We could be looking at a leaf node here
or we could be looking at a node
that doesn't have a left child
so we'll say if the left child is null,
(typing)
well if the left child of this node is null,
we have a found our insertion point.
We want to insert this value as
the leftChild of this node.
And so we'll say leftChild equals
new TreeNode the value we're inserting.
And we're done.
Now if this node does have a left child
meaning we have not found our insertion spot yet
then we're going to call our insert method
on the left child.
So we're gonna say else leftChild dot insert value.
And then what will happen is this leftChild here
it's insert method will be called
and then we'll compare the value against the data etc.
So what we're doing here is we come in,
we check the value we want to insert
against the value for this node.
If the value is less than the value for this node
then we know that we're gonna wanna insert
the values somewhere in this nodes left subtree.
If this node doesn't have a left subtree yet
because it doesn't have a left child,
hey we've found our insertion point.
If it does have a left child then we
want to compare this value against the left child,
and so we're gonna call the insert method
for the left child to do that.
And of course if we came in on the left child
and the value is less than we'd
call the insert method for it's left child, etc.
Now if the value isn't equal to the data
and it's not less than the data
that means it's greater than the data.
So we have to handle that case
and in that case we're going to want to
do the same thing but on the right child.
So we're gonna say else
if rightChild
equals null then we have found our insertion point.
So we'll say rightChild equals
new tree node value.
Otherwise we wanna look at the right child of this node.
And so we'll say rightChild dot insert value.
And so that's the tree nodes insert method
and so essentially if the values are equal
we return 'cause we're not allowing duplicate values.
If the value we wanna insert is
less than this node we're going to
explore it's left subtree.
And if the value is greater we're
gonna explore it's right subtree.
Now if it doesn't have a left subtree
then we've found the insertion point.
If it doesn't have a right subtree
and we wanna go to the right we
have found the insertion point.
Otherwise we're gonna go ahead
and look at the left subtree or the right subtree.
So now let's add an insert method to the tree class.
And so we're gonna say public void insert
and we need the value that we wanna insert.
And so this is what a caller would actually call,
to insert a value into the tree.
And it's the tree class that's gonna call
the insert method with that value.
Now the first thing we're gonna check
is if the root is null because if
the root is null then whatever inserting
just becomes the root node.
So we'll say if root equals null
then root equals new TreeNode value and we're done.
We don't have to do anything else.
So you know as I said before when we're
inserting you always insert into the very first
empty spot you find.
And if you have an empty tree that's gonna be the root.
Now if the root isn't null then we
want to pretty much do what we did in here.
We wanna compare the value against
the root and depending on the comparison result
we wanna go to the left or the right.
And so to do that all we have to do
is call a root dot insert value.
So if we have an empty tree the value we're
inserting becomes the root node.
If we don't have an empty tree we're
gonna call the insert method on root.
And then in here the value would be
compared against the value in the root.
If it's a duplicate value we kick out.
Otherwise depending whether the value is
less than or greater than the value in the root
we're going to explore the
left subtree or the right subtree.
So if I come to the main method here
and let's create a tree instance.
So we'll say tree
let's call it intTree equals new tree.
And then let's insert the value 25.
So we'd say intTree dot insert
25.
And then we can say in tree intTree dot insert
if we're building the tree that we did in the slides,
we're gonna insert 20.
(typing)
and then we're gonna insert 15.
intTree dot insert
27.
(typing)
22 and the final value was 32.
And let's just run.
We won't see anything 'cause we
haven't written a print tree yet but let's run.
And we just wanted to make sure that we
didn't have any errors.
And I'll just say indent with four spaces.
I don't know why it complains about that sometimes
but it does.
So as I said we know we didn't get any errors
but we don't know whether our tree is being built correctly.
For that we'd have to run the debugger
or we need to write a method that
traverses the tree and so it starts at the root
and then access or visits,
we say visit when we're dealing with trees,
it will visit each node in the tree.
And so we'll do that in the next video.
I'll see you there.